Add "Layered Store and struct embedding" blog post (#549)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/blog/2020-02-26-layered-store-and-struct-embedding.md

---

> title: "Layered Store and struct embedding"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Layered Store and Struct Embedding in Go"
```

slug: layered-store-and-struct-embedding
date: 2020-02-26
categories:
    - "go"
author: Jesús Espino
github: jespino
community: jesus.espino
---

> One of the most important parts of the mattermost source code is the one

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the most important parts of the Mattermost source code is the one
```

> One of the most important parts of the mattermost source code is the one

Reviewer 3: is the one????

> responsible to accessing the mattermost database, the store. Every

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
responsible for accessing the Mattermost database - the store. Every
```

single database access is handled by the store, so we needed to find a way to

> extend it in different ways introducing as less complexity as possible,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
extend its functionality while introducing as little complexity as possible,
```

> extend its functionality while introducing as little complexity as possible,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
extend its functionality while introducing as little complexity as possible. 
```

> and that is the reason behind the current layered approach using struct embedding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the reason behind the current layered approach using struct embedding.
```

> Our store is the responsible for storing and retrieving data, and sometimes we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our store is responsible for storing and retrieving data, and sometimes we
```

need to add functionality that is not strictly related to the database queries,

> for example, cache data or add instrumentation. That are transversal tasks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for example, cache data or add instrumentation. Those are transversal tasks
```

and don't necessarily need to be in the same block of code.

> Our approach is based in idea of a core store, the one accessing to the source

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our approach is based in idea of a core store, the one accessing the source
```

of truth (the database), and a set of layers on top of that adding extra

> behavior. All of them, the core Store and all the layers must implement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
behavior. All of them, the core store and all the layers must implement
```

the same interface, in this case the Store interface. This way, from the

> outside, there is not difference between our core Store without layers, or our

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
outside, there is no difference between our core store without layers, or our
```

> core Store with 1000 layers on top of it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
core store with 1000 layers on top of it.
```

![layers](/blog/2020-02-26-layered-store-and-struct-embedding/layers.png)

Each layer is going to embed another layer until the last layer embeds the core
store. Each layer is going to override some methods (or all, depending on the

> layer). Each layer is responsible to decide what is handled entirely by the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
layer). Each layer is responsible for deciding what is handled entirely by the
```

layer (for example a cache hit) or is delegated to the underneath layer (for
example a cache miss).

In our case, the core store is the SqlStore which encapsulates all the SQL
queries execution. And the layers that we put on top of that are:

>   - The Cache Layer: responsible for maintaining a cache of the store calls.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The cache layer: responsible for maintaining a cache of the store calls.
```

>   - The Search Layer: responsible for speeding up the search methods using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The Search Layer: Responsible for speeding up the search methods using
```

    search engines.

>   - The Timer Layer: responsible for sending the duration of each request to an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The Timer Layer: Responsible for sending the duration of each request to a
```

    histogram in Prometheus.

>   - The OpenTracing Layer: responsible for of add the open tracing information

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The OpenTracing Layer: Responsible for adding the open tracing information
```

    related to the store to the open tracing context.

> This 4 layers are adding functionality to our store but without touching a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These four layers add functionality to our store without touching a
```

single line of code of the SqlStore implementation.

> How we do that?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How do we do that?
```

> To solve this problem we used structure embedding what is the way go

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To solve this problem we used structure embedding which is what Go
```

Reviewer 3: I believe the intent here is:
To solve this problem we used structure embedding which is the best practice in situations like this

Author: I wouldn't say is "the best practice", is not necessarily right or wrong, is the tool provided by go for extend functionality the behavior of a structure based on another.

Reviewer 2: How about: 
"To solve this problem, we used structure embedding which is a tool provided by Go to extend the behavior of a struct based on another struct."

> provides to extend behavior of a struct based on other struct. I prefer to not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
provides to extend the behavior of a struct based on another struct. I prefer to not
```

> use the term inheritance here becase is not correct, it is embedding, not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use the term inheritance here because as it is not correct, it is embedding, not
```

> inheritance. I you want to understand better this concept, plese take a look to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
inheritance. If you want to dive deeper into this concept, take a look at
```

the video of the talk [Embedding in go](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-LzYjMzfGDQ)
from [Sean Kelly](https://twitter.com/StabbyCutyou), he explains it better than

> I would can.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I can.
```

As an example I'm going to create a small, simplified version of what we have,
but storing the data in memory (with a small simulated delay) instead of a
database (for simplification).

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"

	"github.com/pkg/errors"
)

type User struct {
	Username string
	FullName string
}

type Store interface {
	GetUser(username string) (*User, error)
	CountUsers() int
	DeleteUser(username string) error
}

type MapStore struct {
	db map[string]*User
}

func NewMapStore() *MapStore {
	return &MapStore{db: make(map[string]*User)}
}

func (s *MapStore) GetUser(username string) (*User, error) {
	time.Sleep(100 * time.Millisecond)
	user, ok := s.db[username]
	if !ok {
		return nil, errors.New("User not found")
	}
	return user, nil
}

func (s *MapStore) CountUsers() int {
	time.Sleep(150 * time.Millisecond)
	return len(s.db)
}

func (s *MapStore) DeleteUser(username string) error {
	time.Sleep(200 * time.Millisecond)
	if _, ok := s.db[username]; !ok {
		return errors.New("User not found")
	}
	delete(s.db, username)
	return nil
}
...
```

> This would be an example base store, now on top of that I going to create an example cache layer:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This would be an example base store, now on top of that I'm going to create an example Cache Layer:
```

```go
...
type CacheLayer struct {
	Store
	cache map[string]*User
}

func NewCacheLayer(substore Store) *CacheLayer {
	return &CacheLayer{
		Store: substore,
		cache: make(map[string]*User),
	}
}

func (s *CacheLayer) GetUser(username string) (*User, error) {
	user, ok := s.cache[username]
	if ok {
		return user, nil
	}
	user, err := s.Store.GetUser(username)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}
	s.cache[username] = user
	return user, nil
}

func (s *CacheLayer) DeleteUser(username string) error {
	delete(s.cache, username)
	return s.Store.DeleteUser(username)
}
...
```

> Here we are creating a new struct called `CacheLayer`, this structs embeds the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here we are creating a new struct called `CacheLayer`, this struct embeds the
```

> `MapStore` (but it could embed any structs that implements the Store interface),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`MapStore` (but it could embed any structs that implement the Store interface),
```

> now we have a new struct that also implements the Store interface, but have a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
now we have a new struct that also implements the Store interface, but has a
```

> different behavior. It will override 2 methods, GetUser and DeleteUser, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
different behavior. It will override 2 methods, ``GetUser`` and ``DeleteUser``, and
```

> CountUsers is going to be handled directly by the embedded store. The GetUser

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``CountUsers`` is going to be handled directly by the embedded store. The ``GetUser``
```

> try to gets the data from the cache, and if not, get the data from the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will try to get the data from the cache, and if it's able to, it will get the data from the
```

> underlaying store and store that in the cache. And for the DeleteUser we remove

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
underlaying store and store that in the cache. And for ``DeleteUser`` we remove
```

the entry from the cache if it exists.

My `MapStore` doesn't know anything about the `CacheLayer`, and the `CacheLayer` only
knows that it have an underneath `Store`, but don't know anything about it except
the interface.

> Now that we have this layers that intercepts things that passing through the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have these layers that intercepts things passing through the
```

> Now that we have these layers that intercepts things passing through the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have these layers that intercept things passing through the
```

store we can do things like instrumentation, for example building a layer that

> count the number os calls per method for example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
counts the number of calls per method for example.
```

> counts the number of calls per method for example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
counts the number of calls per method:
```

```go
...
type CounterLayer struct {
	Store
	counterGetUser    int
	counterDeleteUser int
	counterCountUsers int
}

func NewCounterLayer(substore Store) *CounterLayer {
	return &CounterLayer{
		Store: substore,
	}
}

func (s *CounterLayer) GetUser(username string) (*User, error) {
	s.counterGetUser++
	fmt.Printf("GetUser calls: %d.\n", s.counterGetUser)
	return s.Store.GetUser(username)
}

func (s *CounterLayer) DeleteUser(username string) error {
	s.counterDeleteUser++
	fmt.Printf("DeleteUser calls: %d.\n", s.counterDeleteUser)
	return s.Store.DeleteUser(username)
}

func (s *CounterLayer) CountUsers() int {
	s.counterCountUsers++
	fmt.Printf("CountUsers calls: %d.\n", s.counterCountUsers)
	return s.Store.CountUsers()
}
...
```

> This layers intercepts all the calls made to the Store and print the number of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This layers intercepts all the calls made to the store and prints the number of
```

calls so far.

Another more interesting layer would be a `TimerLayer`.

```go
...
type TimerLayer struct {
	Store
}

func NewTimerLayer(substore Store) *TimerLayer {
	return &TimerLayer{
		Store: substore,
	}
}

func (s *TimerLayer) GetUser(username string) (*User, error) {
	start := time.Now()
	user, err := s.Store.GetUser(username)
	elapsed := float64(time.Since(start)) / float64(time.Second)
	fmt.Printf("GetUser time %f secons.\n", elapsed)
	return user, err
}

func (s *TimerLayer) DeleteUser(username string) error {
	start := time.Now()
	err := s.Store.DeleteUser(username)
	elapsed := float64(time.Since(start)) / float64(time.Second)
	fmt.Printf("DeleteUser time %f secons.\n", elapsed)
	return err
}

func (s *TimerLayer) CountUsers() int {
	start := time.Now()
	count := s.Store.CountUsers()
	elapsed := float64(time.Since(start)) / float64(time.Second)
	fmt.Printf("CountUsers time %f secons.\n", elapsed)
	return count
}
...
```

> This allow us to know how much time is invested in each call. Our Timer layer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allow us to know how much time is invested in each call. Our `TimerLayer`
```

> This allow us to know how much time is invested in each call. Our `TimerLayer`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows us to know how much time is invested in each call. Our `TimerLayer`
```

> implementation is pretty similar to this one, but sending this data to a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
implementation is pretty similar to this one, but sends this data to
```

Prometheous instead of printing it.

This code is super repetitive, and in Mattermost we have a lot of method in our

> store, so we didn't wrote it by hand, we used generators to build the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
store, so we didn't write it by hand; we used generators to build the
```

`TimerLayer` and the `OpenTracingLayer`.

> Having this kind of generators you can build all kind of transparent layers that add extra behavior

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using this kind of generator you can build all kinds of transparent layers that add extra behavior
```

like a `KafkaLayer` to send everything that happens to a kafka, a `LoggerLayer`

> to log everything, a `RandomDelayLayer` to test weird behaviors on unconsistent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to log everything, a `RandomDelayLayer` to test weird behaviors on inconsistent
```

response times, or any other "middleware" that you can think about.

> After everything is implemented we can glue it together embeding the MapStore

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After everything is implemented we can glue it together by embedding the `MapStore`
```

> inside the layers, initialize with some data, and look how it works:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
inside the layers, initializing with some data, and testing how it works:
```

```go
...
func main() {
	mapStore := NewMapStore()
	mapStore.db["test1"] = &User{Username: "test1", FullName: "Test User 1"}
	mapStore.db["test2"] = &User{Username: "test2", FullName: "Test User 2"}
	AppStore :=
		NewTimerLayer(
			NewCounterLayer(
				NewCacheLayer(
					mapStore,
				),
			),
		)

	// Getting the user 1 from the map store (showing the time)
	AppStore.GetUser("test1")
	// Getting the user 2 from the map store (showing the time)
	AppStore.GetUser("test2")
	// Getting the user 1 from the cache store (showing the time)
	AppStore.GetUser("test1")

	// Delete user 1 from the map store (showing the time)
	AppStore.DeleteUser("test1")

	// Counting users
	AppStore.CountUsers()
}
```

> If you executes the whole program you'll get a simular output to the following one:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you execute the whole program you'll get a similar output to this:
```

```
GetUser calls: 1.
GetUser time 0.100314 secons.
GetUser calls: 2.
GetUser time 0.100189 secons.
GetUser calls: 3.
GetUser time 0.000041 secons.
DeleteUser calls: 1.
DeleteUser time 0.200158 secons.
CountUsers calls: 1.
CountUsers time 0.150186 secons.
```

> You can see the first 2 calls to `GetUser` are from the MapStore (because have

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can see the first two calls to `GetUser` are from the `MapStore` (because we have
```

the `time.Sleep` there), the third one is faster because you are using the

> CacheLayer, and we can see all this thanks to the instrumentation layers that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`CacheLayer`, and we can see all this thanks to the instrumentation layers that
```

we built.

> This approach is not perfect, and have some clear flaws, the main one is the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach is not perfect, and does have some flaws. The main one is that the
```

> struct embedding is not behaving as one comming from object oriented languages

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
struct embedding doesn't behave as one coming from object oriented languages
```

> would expect from inheritance (because is not inheritance), when you call a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
would expect from inheritance - because is not inheritance. When you call a
```

> method in a struct that embeds another sturct, and the method doesn't exist in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
method in a struct that embeds another struct, and the method doesn't exist in
```

the parent struct, the embedded struct method is called, and at that point, you

> are in the embedded struct without any knowledge of the parent struct, so if

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are in the embedded struct without any knowledge of the parent struct. So, if
```

> you call there any other method of the struct, is not going to be overriden,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you call any other method of the struct, it will not be overwritten and
```

this can be error prone sometimes.

> Other problem with this approach is related to how the layers work, you are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another problem with this approach is related to how the layers work. You are
```

> wrapping entire methods, so is all or nothing. You can't override part of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
wrapping entire methods, so it's all or nothing. You can't override part of the
```

> method, or reuse only certain parts of the underneath code easily and that can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
method, or reuse only certain parts of the underlying code easily and that can
```

> generate ton of duplicated code depending on what you want to do.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
generate a ton of duplicated code depending on what you want to do.
```

> We have included this architecture change some months ago, and so far for us

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We implemented this architecture change some months ago, and so far for us it's
```

> has been a very good way to add our instrumentation and cache without mixing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
been a very good way to add our instrumentation and cache without mixing
```

> responsabilities in our source code. And we think we can add special layers to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
responsibilities in our source code. And we think we can add special layers to
```

generate performance improvements relaying in other services, like key value

> stores, or graph databases. For sure, something that we will investigate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
stores, or graph databases and we're looking into that.
```
